survey: Add Feb, 2021 survey article (#485)
haiku/website: content/blog/kallisti5/2021-03-22_feb_2021_survey_results.md

+++
type = "blog"
title = "Feb 2021 - Survey Results"
author = "kallisti5"
date = "2021-03-22 17:37:59-05:00"
tags = ["haiku", "software", "survey"]
+++

> Earier this month, I created a quick survey to guage what topics are most important to the Haiku communtity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earier this month, I created a quick survey to gauge what topics are most important to the Haiku communtity.
```

Reviewer 2: community also has an extra t here.

Author: fixed :-)

> Earlier this month, I created a quick survey to gauge what topics are most important to the Haiku community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Back in February, I created a quick survey to gauge what topics are most important to the Haiku community.
This blog post got held up a bit in review but better late than never...<br/>
```

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me.

We had 387 responses making this pretty substantial in helping us evaluate places we need to improve.<br/><br/>
Thanks to everyone who filled out this survey!<br/>

> I'll be going over the results and adding a little commentary along the way. Lets go!

Author: resolved

> I'll be going over the results and adding a little commentary along the way. Lets go!

Author: Improved.

## Which version of Haiku do you normally use?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/1.png" alt="59.7% Stable, 40.3% Nightly"><br/>

> So far, not too suprising. A lot of people value the stable R1/Beta 2 release, but most prefer the nightly images. This makes sense as R1 / Beta 2 was released around 9 months ago.

Reviewer: your alt text says the opposite (60% using the stable release)

Author: fixed

> So far, not too suprising. A lot of people value the stable R1/Beta 2 release, but most prefer the nightly images. This makes sense as R1 / Beta 2 was released around 9 months ago.

Reviewer 4: Typo: 
```suggestion
So far, not too surprising. A lot of people value the stable R1/Beta 2 release, but most prefer the nightly images. This makes sense as R1 / Beta 2 was released around 9 months ago.
```

## What architecture do you normally use?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/2.png" alt="85.5% x86_64 (64-bit), 14.5% x86_gcc2 (32-bit)"><br/>

We continue to support the 32-bit version of Haiku for its BeOS binary compatibility. However, it appears the trend continues to be users gravitating to the more modern x86_64.

> This further solidifies the idea that after R1, the 32-bit version of Haiku will be eventually deprecated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This further supports gradually deprecating 32-bit Haiku after the release of R1.
```

Author: resolved

## How often do you use haiku on a virtual machine vs physical hardware?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/3.png" alt="41.3% of people never use Haiku in a VM. 32.3% of people never use haiku on physical hardware"><br/>

This one is interesting. It seems more users prefer running Haiku on physical hardware. Those who run Haiku on physical hardware also run Haiku daily more often then users who run Haiku in a virtual machine.

## What is the most "common problem" you see when using Haiku?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/4.png" alt="53.7% Hardware/Driver support, 37.7% Lack of software"><br/>

This one doesn't give a lot of interesting data. Hardware / Driver support in the top position isn't suprising. Haiku supports a large amount of hardware natively for our size... however we definitely stagger behind Linux and the BSD's on hardware support.

## What class of hardware has the most problems in your experience

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/5.png" alt="45.5% Graphics, 19.6% Network, "><br/>

> Not suprising.  While Haiku supports quite a few mainstream graphics cards, we are always finding edge cases and broken modesetting.

Reviewer 4: Same typo :)
```suggestion
Not surprising.  While Haiku supports quite a few mainstream graphics cards, we are always finding edge cases and broken modesetting.
```

There are some long-planned projects trying to piggyback on Linux's graphics drivers... however nothing has even really taken shape beyond our native drivers.

> Network is actually a little suprising to me here. I personally don't see too many issues with network cards.

Reviewer 4: And again... :)
```suggestion
Network is actually a little surprising to me here. I personally don't see too many issues with network cards.
```

> I'm wondering if by 'Network' users actually mean our control panel / wifi network selection / etc?

Reviewer: That seems like a wild guess. There are many wifi chipstes that aren't supported (I have some affected machines myself), and even for those which work, things aren't always super stable.

In general the state of Wifi is not so great, not to mention the lack of usb wifi solutions (which would at least be easy to add to existing hardware as a stopgap)

Author: It is a guess to be honest.

My own "wired" experiences have been perfect for quite a while now across a wide range of hardware... which is what led me to focusing on Wifi.

So.. instead of mentioning our network control panel... Wifi driver support (USB and PCI) and Wifi network selection?

I'm bringing up the wifi network selection because I know we already have a few issues there around not "merging similar AP names"      We need to put wpa_supplicant into a fork'd git repository tbh.  All of our wifi code exists within a haikuports patch.

## What class of software is the most lacking?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/5.png" alt="60.2% Web Browser"><br/>

> Not suprising at all.<br/><br/>

Reviewer 4: Lot's of 'suprises' in Haiku development. :)
```suggestion
Not surprising at all.<br/><br/>
```

Author: I write code, not books :P   fixed.

The web browser has catapulted to the "most important" application in the last decade for pretty much all tasks. (checking email, news, char, multimedia, some gaming)<br/><br/>

> WebPositive is based on the modern Webkit engine, however our fork of Webkit moves slowly on the tail of the *rapidly* moving Webkit project. We spend a lot of time rebasing our OS support on the latest Webkit changes. We hope to eventually get our OS support code merged so we can refocus on improving and stabilizing WebPositive over "keeping up"

Reviewer: The main problem is all the work going on on webkit since beta2 was not made available to users, due to using changes in the OS that will only be available in beta3.
This slows down the response time when users report bugs on the web browser, and probably reduces the motivation for people contributing to it as their changes take a long time to become available.

Author: Don't take this as any kind of attack. You have been doing an amazing job with what you have to work with.
Do you have any concrete recommendations on how to improve the above statement?   Overall we saw a *TON* of people mentioning WebPositive (and the selection of browsers in general), so we should really hit the issue head on.

Reviewer: Saying that our fork moves slowly is not true. The fork is usually maybe a month behind upstream, which is ok. The problem is mainly in getting this work in the hands of our users, and it should be solved by the beta3 release.

```suggestion
WebPositive is based on the modern Webkit engine, however, WebKit relies on a rater large amount of platform specific code. On one side, this makes sure it integrates very well with the OS (using, for example, the same font rendering as other applications). On the other, updating WebKit requires some development on our side and continues to push it to improve our APIs (for both network and drawing code, as well as other parts of the system). This also resulted on WebKit development waiting on the availability of a new stable release of Haiku (including new features) in order to ship updates. Recently we have worked on improving the ABI stability of some parts of Haiku to make it easier to ship improved versions of WebKit more often.
```

Author: Applied change to latest update.

## What kind of performance issues do you see?

<img src="/files/survey_feb2021/6.png" alt="44.4% Graphics, 28.9% None"><br/>

We still lack GPU accelerated OpenGL rendering support.<br/>

> The Mesa project has been amazing helping us keep Haiku support upstream, however our graphics stack needs redesigned around some level of compatibility the [Linux DRM API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_Rendering_Manager).

Author: resolved

Today we render using upstream Mesa via their llvm-accelerated software renderer. This allows you to "brute force" through OpenGL workloads with your CPU, but doesn't offer the extensive hardware OpenGL performance graphics cards are designed for.

## Freestyle answers

We received a *TON* of positive feedback from the community in the last freestyle comment box.<br/>
I'm omitting it here since we all know Haiku is amazing/great :-)<br/><br/>

I've chosen the more interesting comments to include here (for better or worse)

> ### If one sentence could summarize the biggest reason you don't use Haiku dailt, what would it be?

Reviewer 2: daily typo here.

* "I still think PM was a mistake, at least in this implementation because it caused too many divisions in the community."
* "Multi-monitor support is a must"
* "Need to start anticipating multi user support"
* "I'm a classroom teacher, so a single user OS is of little use for me on lab machines. I would love to use it on Raspberry Pi's, but it seems the Haiku community is not much interested in that.  Oh well."
* "Haiku team should prioritize on releasing R1 as soon as possible. Everything else can wait. It's important in order to attract new developers."
* "The Alt vs Ctrl issue is getting on my nerves, and I've used BeOS since 2001. Makes switching between Win/Linux/Haiku a pain in the ass everytime Haiku does it differently."
* "No working video playback in webpositive and otter browsers"

## Overall Summary

Looking at the big picture above, several things stand out.

1) We need to put a strong focus on continuing to improve WebPositive. 
2) We need to work on a roadmap of how Haiku could present Linux DRM/KMS compatibility API's to Mesa. We really can't make any accelerated graphics progress without this.

I personally think #1 is a lot more possible in the short term.<br/>

>  #2 is going to be a *LOT* of work in the medium / long term.

Reviewer 2: Starting a sentence with `#2` doesn't seem correct to me. Maybe "But #2" or "On the other hand #2". But this doesn't need to be a blocker.
